---
layout: post
title: Oddities of Oxford: Scholars' Gown
---

**_Establishing a visible hierarchy based on academic achievements is problematic, but its normalisation is disturbingly odd_**

Imagine entering an examination hall where all examinees are constantly reminded that they are academically unequal, in which some are better than others. Imagine such differentiation produces results in which women, state-educated students and students with disabilities fare significantly worse. More importantly, imagine that actions that promote such a state of affairs are normalized, or even looked up upon.

This is Oxford in 2017, where students are constantly reminded of their past academic achievements in examinations through differentiated gowns, where entitlement is rarely recognized, let alone questioned. In a recent student referendum, 63% of students upheld the status quo in which certain students, primarily who attained good examination results previously, are entitled to wear a scholars’ gown in examinations.

The status quo gives a *choice* for scholars to wear the scholar's’ gown in examinations, and this entails responsibility that is seldom recognized. It is simply not good enough just to say: `I am entitled to X; hence, I am justified to do X`; the consequences of the action itself ought to be scrutinized. In this case, it is to objectively convey a signal of academic superiority over one’s peers in the examination hall. Perhaps this is too crude of a generalization, but the prime value of the scholars’ gown does stem from the fact that it is only conferred to a subset of students, and there is no possible justification other than the purely aesthetic.

While most students barely pay attention to their peers’ gowns in examinations, some do, and this is already enough for us to question whether such entitlement is justified. Specifically, one must answer whether we ought to prioritize students’ ‘right’ to wear a gown over some other students’ wellbeing in a setting which may produce an outcome that affects them for life. A potential solution is to examine the benefits conferred for each of the above options. Not surprisingly, the scholars’ gown adds little other than a normalized channel of social recognition for high-achievers, who already are entitled to monetary awards and, surprise, recognition on transcripts.

Above all, even if the institution incentivizes students to work hard academically, it is a perversion of what an education institute should achieve: treating knowledge and learning as an end in itself. What the scholars’ gown adds is recognition, or to put it crudely, vanity, but why is this necessary if learning is valued and intrinsic meaning is assigned to it? Why is it valuable to recognise examination performance, which is dangerously correlated with certain traits which most people consider as privilege, and luck? Perhaps examinations are a necessary evil to measure learning outcome, but normalizing what would have otherwise been a socially questionable act of display should not be, especially when many of those who elect to do so have the best intentions in mind.

And this may be detrimental to those who wear a gown too. Gilovich, Medvec and Savitsky (2000) showed that individuals with identifiable traits tend to overestimate the magnitude of others’ gazes on themselves. The scholars’ gown is above all a construct that affects scholars the most, as it’s both a carrot and a stick – not only is pressure exerted on scholars (perhaps by themselves) to ‘live up’ to such an ideal, some colleges do and actually will take such a right away from scholars whom they believe are underperforming.

The scholars’ gown debate is a symptom of widespread and uncritical acceptance of privilege, and the lack of reflection over potential consequences of such acceptance, in Oxford. It is easy to fall for the notion that one should accept privilege entailed by one’s achievements, and this may be unfortunately more acute amongst those faring very well. It will be a travesty if well-meaning people are blinded from a critical appraisal of such privilege just because it is entrenched and normalized.
