---
layout: post
title: Market Socialism
Summary: Re-post of essay on market socialism
date:   2018-01-19 22:16:01 +0000
categories: blog HT18
published: true
---

Market socialism has always been a topic that fascinated me. Even if socialism is a good idea in itself, as Cohen argued in his camping trip, the failures of the command and control structure were more than apparant given the experience in 20c.

Below is the tutorial essay that I have written for the topic. Feedback and criticism will be much welcomed.


## Essay

G. A. Cohen (2009), in _Why not socialism?_, proclaimed that the correct conclusion to socialism’s feasibility problem and the dominance of right-liberal economic policies is not to ‘give up’; he argued that market socialism may potentially be a means to put socialism into practice yet lamenting that ‘the market is intrinsically repugnant’ from a socialist viewpoint. Not only do I believe that market socialism is feasible and coherent, I also reject the notion that markets are incompatible with socialism. Contrary to Cohen’s argument, my argument is one of positive affirmation of the market’s power in feasibly delivering socialist end-states, instead of a compromising one that accepts a socially inferior outcome out of practicality.

In this essay, I will first specify what I mean by market socialism and its associated benefits, while demonstrating that market socialism is at least prima facie compatible with socialism as end state values. Such interpretation of socialism will be defended against an interpretation of Marx that rejects markets in the final stage of socialism. Then, I will argue that market socialism is not a contradiction in terms, that is, markets and socialism are not inherently incompatible with one another. Firstly, I will argue it is coherent to evaluate or induce market outcomes based on socialist, or in fact, any values. This is because markets’ decentralised and non-intentional nature does not absolve responsibility over its outcome, as the maintenance of a market economy is in fact intentional; moreover, I will argue it is false to claim that the objectives of socialism and the market are in a trade-off. Secondly, I will argue that the market, in its most basic form, is not inherently undesirable. The market in itself does not necessarily produce undeserved outcomes, nor do they encourage the severing of social relations between economic agents.

A market socialist economy is an economy in which firms and capital are not owned by private individuals but instead by the state, a collective of workers or a public body; at the same time, it is a market economy as exchanges of goods and factors of production (e.g. work, capital) take place through voluntary exchanges (i.e. market mechanism) which produce and also rely on market prices (Roemer, 2016). This is contrasted with a common interpretation of market socialism as a mixed economy, in which most means of production are privately owned yet, at the same time, the government actively intervenes in the market for social objectives, such as labour and union rights, social welfare, and environmental protection (Wright, 1996). Contrary to the latter interpretation, most notably championed by Third Way politicians, market socialism requires the _public ownership_ of firms and capital, which should be subject to some form of democratic control and grant workers at least some degree of workplace democracy.

Market socialism’s advantages over planning include its ability of providing information and incentives to economic agents through market prices and enabling the expression and satisfaction of diverse preferences among individuals (Miller, 1989). This entail that goods need not be provided through the presence of a central planner who needs to know and provide for the preferences of consumers, which is extremely problematic not only because of the unease of calculation but also because of the near impossibility for the smallest of individual preference to be measured. Moreover, markets for goods can exist among consumers, meaning that large-scale mutually beneficial exchanges may take place. This, however, does not mean that economic agents need to be selfish, or acting ‘individualistically rationally’ in a Walras-Nash equilibrium (Roemer, 2016); economic agents only need to be demonstrate consistent preferences. For example, if economic agents prefer the best altruistic outcome, markets can also deliver the most efficient outcome _in such terms_. Another caveat of market socialism is that it does not address injustices arising from race, gender, sexuality etc. under capitalism (Estrin and Le Grand, 1989).

Markets are prima facie compatible with socialism as end state values, which I will define and defend. Markets per se only represent the abstract collection of voluntary exchanges that arise out of perceived benefit to all parties involved. While the starting point of individuals before they enter the markets, or the outcome of the markets, may be unjust, the set of voluntary exchanges between all participating agents, provided that they possess the same information and market power, should not be problematic. Of course, the latter assumption is not always fulfilled under capitalist competition; however, unless one can prove that this is a _necessary_ consequence of markets, markets are not at fault here. Socialism, in this context, refers to end state values such as ‘greater equality, satisfaction of a wider range of basic needs… the development of citizenship as a positive status with guaranteed rights to positive resources… a greater sense of fraternity, and community’ etc. (Plant, 1989). At face value, these readings of markets and socialism do not appear be in conflict. Moreover, even if socialism is taken as non-capitalism, that is, as the non-private (i.e. public) ownership of the means of production, the above formulation of market socialism, given that ownership of the firms are lies in the government, is still compatible.

Yet, an interpretation of Marx argues that markets are against socialism’s very definition. Writing in the _Critique of the Gotha Programme_, Marx (2009) noted that when a socialist society is realised:

> Within the collective society based on common ownership of the means of production, the producers do not exchange their products; just as little does the labour employed on the products appear here as the value of these products, as a material quality possessed by them.

The lack of exchange by producers with their proceeds of labour is substituted by a distribution of goods according to consumers’ use values instead of the laws of demand and supply. Yet, I argue that this alone does not constitute a reason for market socialism to be internally inconsistent, because this reflects a prediction of what socialism will be, instead of a moralistic condemnation of markets being incompatible with socialism. Moreover, the exchange of goods and services is present in the dictatorship of the proletariat, Marx’s interpretation of the transition from a capitalist society to the socialist end-state. It will be premise circular to argue that socialism must be non-market by definition, as the latter is not immediately obvious. While some aspects of the market may be fundamentally contradictory to socialist values, which I will address, market socialism cannot be said to be a contradiction in terms because socialism by definition is incompatible with markets.

I now address two related criticisms levelled against market socialism’s coherence: that it is not possible to evaluate market outcomes based on socialist end-state values, or to ‘have the cake and eat it’ when it comes to a necessary trade-off between socialist values and market efficiency. Markets, as I have specified above, are institutions in which only the procedural elements are specified. In other words, there cannot possibly have an intentional outcome or distribution associated with the market, contrary to the goal-directed and end-state theories of socialism (Hayek; cited by Plant, 1989). In other words, while outcomes of government planning can be evaluated based on certain deontological criteria, as these outcomes are results of conscious human actions, outcomes of market transactions cannot be treated similarly. Claiming that there is a thing such as ‘market socialism’ exists, in this view, is similar to claiming the existence of ‘sunny day socialism’. Yet, I argue that this is false, because markets are by no means something that arises from nature – the maintenance of a large-scale market economy is an intentional social decision: private property and the rules of exchange have to be socially determined and nearly always be backed up by credible threats of physical coercion by the state. While the outcome may not reflect the intention of any agent, the inequalities and other problems that may arise from markets should be foreseen when these transactions are allowed to take place. Most importantly, parameters governing exchanges, such the rules of the market (e.g. disallowing inheritance) and the conditions of market participants before entering the market, are within society’s control as well. For example, given that the disabled will most likely receive little real income in the market, society, foreseeing that they may be precarious in the market outcome, may be obligated to provide additional support.  This leads to the second objection: benefits of the market and intervention to promote certain socialist values are necessarily in conflict with one another (Plant, 1989). In other words, interference distorts the information and incentives provided by the market – economic agents may rationally expect such intervention and will react accordingly. To realise the desired outcome, markets will have to be fettered with interventions similar to that in a command economy. However, this objection ignores two responses: firstly, economic agents cannot respond to certain forms of redistribution - lump-sum transfers based on attributes that cannot be falsified (e.g. permanent disability) or conducted universally pose no distortionary effects on work and consumption decisions. Secondly, it is not necessary that individuals will act selfishly when such interventions are known to be carried out for public benefit.

Finally, I now consider whether markets are inherently ‘repugnant’ and hence incompatible with socialist values of community and fraternity. In many interpretations, economic agents respond only to price and other market signals, and act to maximise self-interests, however they may be defined. In this section, I will consider and refute two criticisms of market: 1.) that markets rely on and encourage ‘low-grade incentives’, such as selfishness (Cohen, 2009) 2.) that markets encourage people only be treated as means to selfish ends, exacerbating alienation and the removal of social relations between economic agents (Marx, 1997). Firstly, markets, do, at first sight, appear to rely entirely on individualistically rational behaviour in order to function; for example, if workers are organised in the form of cooperatives, the high costs of decision making, however desirable the process itself may be, pose a significant difficulty over its survival in face of other privately-owned firms; in other words, workers will be better off working in a capitalistic firm in terms of the material benefits (Estrin, 1989). Yet, I believe this is not a property intrinsic to markets. If society accepts certain non-material benefits, say the value in workplace democracy and environmental protection, the government can levy taxes or otherwise intervene so that these values can be enshrined even at the expense of ‘efficiency’. Market participants are not entirely, if at all, driven by greed, and it is the job for the society to provide for the correct incentives. The ‘free market’ model which is hegemonic in modern economics should not be assumed as a default formulation of the market

Markets are also thought to be incompatible with socialist values of community and fraternity as individuals are only treated instrumentally as a means to the end of profits; having no choice but to sell their labour power to capital, individuals are hence alienated from their work and their species being, while being alienated from one another as the social relationship between producers are consumers are reduced into a mere cash nexus (Marx, 1997). Yet, this is not an accurate description of a market socialist economy, when markets are sufficiently ‘socialised’ through the provision of some form of basic income, introduction of workplace democracy, and where public spirit is prevalent in the community (Elson, 1988). Since capital is socially owned within a market socialist economy, individuals will at least have some degree of democratic control over their work, making alienation not at all obvious. In fact, the problem really lies in the degree of such control, which depends on the mechanism at which decisions are taken at the workplace, not whether the economy is based on markets or government command. Secondly, markets will no more likely be severing the social ties between different economic agents than other forms of economic system, given that the scale of production is large enough. Even within a planned economy, the connection between individuals is not obvious – when a commodity is passed on from its producer to consumer via government planning, both parties are hardly engaging in production or consumption conscientious of the other. As Miller (1989) succinctly summarised in the phrase ‘monolithic communitarian’, such criticism reflects the romanticism of the pre-industrial age, as a personal connection between the consumer and the many producer(s) in a sophisticated economy is impossible. Again, what matters should lie in whether the community / the government promotes such public spirit between economic agents, which is not the market’s fault.

In this essay, I have argued that market socialism is a coherent concept, and most importantly, is a legitimate form of socialism, not a ‘middle ground’ compromise between an inefficient yet socialist planned economy and an efficient yet repulsive market economy. Particularly, I have clearly defined what market socialism is, and how it is not by definition contradictory with end-state theories of socialism. Moreover, I defended market socialism’s coherence by arguing that goal-directed theories of socialism are compatible with market as procedural institutions, as the latter relies on an intentional decision to maintain; I also defended the desirability of markets, as undesirable attributes of markets stem from systems of ownership instead of markets themselves. The market, in its most basic form, simply enables trade to occur between individuals. While markets are powerful, sometimes for the better and sometimes for the worse, the socialist answer to markets should be one of further investigation, not one of blanket, uncritical rejection.

## References

_Cohen, G. A., Why Not Socialism? (2009)._

_Elson, Diane, ‘Market Socialism or Socialization of the Market?’, New Left Review I/172 (1988), pp.3-44._

_Le Grand, Julian and Estrin, Saul (1989), Market Socialism_

_Marx, Karl (1997), Critique of the Gotha Program in David McLellan, ed._

_Marx, Karl (1997), The Communist Manifesto in David McLellan, ed._

_Roemer, J. E. (2017). A Design for Market Socialism._

_Ronzoni, Miriam (2012), ‘Life is Not a Camping Trip – On the Desirability of Cohenite Socialism’, Politics, Philosophy & Economics 11(2), pp.171-185._

_Wright, Tony, Socialisms (1996)_
